---
layout: newspaper
title: Killer Robot Programmer Was Prima Donna Co-Workers Claim
---



# 'Killer Robot' Programmer Was Prima Donna, Co-Workers Claim

### Special to the SILICON VALLEY SENTINEL-OBSERVER, Silicon Valley, USA

<div class="byline">
  <img alt="Mabel headshot" src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-muckraker.jpg" />
  by Mabel Muckraker
</div>

Randy Samuels, the former Silicon Techtronics programmer who was indicted for
writing the software that was responsible for the gruesome 'killer robot'
incident last May, was apparently a 'prima donna' who found it very difficult
to accept criticism, several of his co-workers claimed today.

<figure class="pair">
    <img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-samuels.jpg" class="headshot"
         alt="Randy Samuels"><img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-cx30.jpg"
         alt-="CX30 robot"  class="headshot">
    <figcaption>
      Randy Matthews (left) programmed the Silicon Techtronics CX30 robot
      that malfunctioned and killed worker Bart Matthews at the
      Cybernetics, Inc facility.
    </figcaption>
</figure>


In a free-wheeling interview with several of Samuels' co-workers on the 'killer
robot' project, the Sentinel-Observer was able to gain important insights into
the psyche of the man who may have been criminally responsible for the death of
Bart Matthews, robot operator and father of three small children.

With the permission of those interviewed, the Sentinel-Observer allowed
Professor Sharon Skinner of the Department of Software Psychology at Silicon
Valley University to listen to a recording of the interview. Professor Skinner
studies the psychology of programmers and other psychological factors which
impact upon the software development process.

"I would agree with the woman who called him a 'prima donna'," Professor
Skinner explained. "This is a term used to refer to a programmer who just
cannot accept criticism, or more accurately, cannot accept his or her own
fallibility."

"Randy Samuels has what we software psychologists call a task- oriented
personality, bordering on self-oriented. He likes to get things done, but his
ego is heavily involved in his work. In the programming world this is
considered a 'no-no,'" Professor Skinner added in her book-lined office.

Professor Skinner went on to explain some additional facts about programming
teams and programmer personalities. "Basically, we have found that a good
programming team requires a mixture of personality types, including a person
who is interaction-oriented, who derives a lot of satisfaction from working
with other people, someone who can help keep the peace and keep things moving
in a positive direction. Most programmers are task-oriented, and this can be a
problem if one has a team in which everyone is task-oriented."

Samuels' co-workers were very reluctant to lay the blame for the robot disaster
at his feet, but when pressed to comment on Samuels' personality and work
habits, several important facts emerged. Samuels worked on a team consisting of
about a dozen analysts, programmers and software testers. (This does not
include twenty programmers who were later hired and who never became actively
involved in the development of the robotics software.) Although individual team
members had definite specialties, almost all were involved in the entire
software process from beginning to end.

"Sam Reynolds has a background in data processing. He's managed several
software projects of that nature," one of the team members said, referring to
the manager of the Robbie CX30 project. "But, his role in the project was
mostly managerial. He attended all important meetings and he kept Ray [Ray
Johnson, the Robotics Division Chief] off our backs as much as possible."

Sam Reynolds, as was reported in yesterday's Sentinel- Observer, was under
severe pressure to deliver a working Robbie CX30 robot by January 1 of this
year. Sam Reynolds could not be reached for comment either about his role in
the incident or about Samuels and his work habits.

"We were a democratic team, except for the managerial guidance provided by Sam
[Reynolds]," another team member observed. In the world of software
development, a democratic team is a team in which all team members have an
equal say in the decision-making process. "Unfortunately, we were a team of
very ambitious, very talented — if I must say so myself — and very
opinionated individualists. Randy [Samuels] was just the worst of the lot. I
mean we have two guys and one gal with masters degrees from CMU who weren't as
arrogant as Randy."

CMU refers to Carnegie Mellon University, a national leader in software
engineering education.

One co-worker told of an incident in which Samuels stormed out of a quality
assurance meeting. This meeting involved Samuels and three 'readers' of a
software module which he had designed and implemented. Such a meeting is called
a code review. One of the readers mentioned that Samuels had used a very
inefficient algorithm (program) for achieving a certain result and Samuelson
"turned beet red." He yelled a stream of obscenities and then left the meeting.
He never returned.

"We sent him a memo about the faster algorithm and he eventually did use the
more efficient algorithm in his module," the co-worker added.

The software module in the quality assurance incident was the very one which
was found to be at fault in the robot operator "murder." However, this
co-worker was quick to point out that the efficiency of the algorithm was not
an issue in the malfunctioning of the robot.

"It's just that Randy made if very difficult for people to communicate their
concerns to him. He took everything very personally. He graduated tops in his
class at college and later graduated with honors in software engineering from
Purdue. He's definitely very bright."

"Randy had this big computer-generated banner on his wall," this co-worker
continued. "It said, 'YOU GIVE ME THE SPECIFICATION AND I'LL GIVE YOU THE
COMPUTATION'. That's the kind of arrogance he had and it also shows that he had
little patience for developing and checking the specifications. He loved the
problem-solving aspect, the programming itself."

<figure>
    <img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-skinner.jpg"
         alt="Prof Sharon Skinner" class="headshot">
    <figcaption>
      Professor Sharon Skinner of the Department of Software Psychology
      at Silicon Valley University
    </figcaption>
</figure>

"It doesn't seem that Randy Samuels caught on to the spirit of 'egoless
programming,'" Professor Skinner observed upon hearing this part of the
interview with Samuels' co-workers. "The idea of egoless programming is that a
software product belongs to the team and not to the individual programmers. The
idea is to be open to criticism and to be less attached to one's work. Code
reviews are certainly consistent with this overall philosophy."

A female co-worker spoke of another aspect of Samuelson's personality — his
helpfulness. "Randy hated meetings, but he was pretty good one on one. He was
always eager to help. I remember one time when I ran into a serious roadblock
and instead of just pointing me in the right direction, he took over the
problem and solved it himself. He spent nearly five entire days on my problem."

"Of course, in retrospect, it might have been better for poor Mr. Matthews and
his family if Randy had stuck to his own business," she added after a long
pause.

