---
layout: newspaper
---

# 'Killer Robot' Project Mired in Controversy Right from Start

## Warring Factions Fought Over How Project Should Proceed

### Special to the SILICON VALLEY SENTINEL-OBSERVER, Silicon Valley, USA

<div class="byline mabel">
  <img alt="Mabel headshot" src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-muckraker.jpg" />
  by Mabel Muckraker
</div>

Two groups, committed to different software development philosophies, nearly
came to blows during the initial planning meetings for Robbie CX30, the Silicon
Techtronics robot which killed an assembly line worker last May. At issue was
whether the Robbie CX30 project should proceed according to the "waterfall
model" or the "prototyping model."

<figure>
    <img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/silicon-techtronics-hq.jpg"
         alt="Silicon Techtronics HQ">
    <figcaption>
      Silicon Techtronics HQ, Robotics Division
    </figcaption>
</figure>

The waterfall model and the prototyping model are two common methods for
organizing a software project. In the waterfall model, a software project goes
through definite stages of development. The first stage is requirements
analysis and specification, during which an attempt is made to arrive at an
agreement concerning the detailed functionality of the system. As the project
passes from one stage to the next, there are limited opportunities for going
back and changing earlier decisions. One drawback of this approach is that
potential users do not get a chance to interact with the system until very late
in the system's life cycle.

In the prototyping model, great emphasis is placed on producing a working model
or prototype early during the life cycle of a system. The prototype is built
for the purpose of arriving at a final specification of the functionality of
the proposed system. Potential users interact with the prototype early and
often until the requirements are agreed upon. This approach affords potential
users the opportunity to interact with a prototype system early during the
development cycle and long before the final system is designed and coded.

In a memo dated December 11th of the year before last, Jan Anderson, a member
of the original Robbie CX30 project team, bitterly attacked the decision of the
project manager, Sam Reynolds, to employ the waterfall model. The
Sentinel-Observer has obtained a copy of Anderson's memo, which is addressed to
Reynolds, and Anderson verified the authenticity of the memo for this reporter.

Reynolds fired Anderson on December 24th, just two weeks after she wrote the
memo.

The Anderson memo refers to an earlier meeting at which an angry exchange
occurred relating to software development philosophy. Anderson underlined the
following passage in her memo:

> "I did not intend to impugn your competence at our meeting yesterday, but I
> must protest most vehemently against the idea that we complete the Robbie
> CX30 software following the waterfall model which you have used in previous
> projects. I need not remind you that those were data processing projects
> involving the processing of business transactions. The Robbie CX30 project
> will involve a high degree of interaction, both between robot components and
> between the robot and the operator. Since operator interaction with the robot
> is so important, the interface cannot be designed as an afterthought."

Randy Samuels, who has been charged with manslaughter in the death of robot
operator Bart Matthews, father of three, was in attendance at the December 11th
meeting.

In a conversation with this reporter, Anderson said that Samuels did not have
much to say about the waterfall-prototyping controversy, but she did state that
she would give her "eye teeth" to have Samuels exonerated.

"The project was doomed long before Samuels misinterpreted those formulas,"
Anderson stated emphatically, in the living room of her suburban townhouse.

In her conversation with this reporter, Anderson did her best to explain the
waterfall-prototyping controversy in lay terms. "The main issue was really
whether we could agree on the system requirements without allowing actual robot
operators to get a feel for what we had in mind. Reynolds has been in the data
processing business for three decades and he's good at that, but he never
should have been made manager of this project."

According to records obtained by the Sentinel-Observer, Silicon Techtronics
moved Sam Reynolds from the Data Processing Division, which took care of
inventory and payroll, to the Robotics Division just three weeks before the
December 11th meeting alluded to in Anderson's memo.

Reynolds was moved to the Robotics Division by Silicon Techtronics president
Michael Waterson. Reynolds was replacing John Cramer, who managed the earlier
Robbie projects, CX10 and CX20. Cramer was placed in charge of CX30, but he
died unexpectedly in a skydiving accident. In placing Reynolds in charge of the
CX30 project, our sources tell us that Waterson was going against the advice of
Ray Johnson, Robotics Division Chief.

<figure>
    <img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-anderson.jpg"
         alt="Jan Anderson" class="headshot"><img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-johnson.jpg"
         alt-="Ray Johnson"  class="headshot">
    <figcaption>
      Jan Anderson (left) former programmer and analyst at Silicon
      Techtronics, and Ray Johnson, the company's Robotics Division Chief.
      Anserson says, "The project was doomed long before Samuels misinterpreted
      those formulas."
    </figcaption>
</figure>

According to these sources Johnson strongly opposed Reynolds' choice as head of
the Robbie CX30 project. These sources tell the Sentinel-Observer that
Waterson's choice of Reynolds was purely a cost-saving decision. It was cheaper
to move Reynolds to the Robotics Division than to hire a new project leader
from outside the corporation.

The anonymous source that the Sentinel-Observer calls 'Martha' described the
situation in this way: "Waterson thought it would be cheaper to move Reynolds
to robotics rather than try to find a new manager for the Robbie project from
outside. Also, Waterson tended to be suspicious of people from the outside. He
often sends down memos about how long it takes people to master 'the Silicon
Techtronics way of doing things'. In Waterson's view, Reynolds was a manager
and he was moved to his new position in Robotics as a manager and not as a
technical expert. Clearly, Reynolds saw himself as both a manager and as a
technical expert. Reynolds was not aware of his own technical limitations."

According to Martha, Reynolds was very reluctant to manage a project which
would not use the waterfall model which had served him so well in data
processing. He attacked prototyping as a "fad" at the meeting on December 11th
and after a few verbal exchanges back and forth things got pretty personal.

"Anderson was especially vocal," Martha recalled. "She had lots of experience
with user interfaces and from her perspective, the operator-robot interface was
critical to the success of CX30 since operator intervention would be frequent
and at times critical."

In her interview with the Sentinel-Observer, Jan Anderson commented on this
aspect of the December 11th meeting: "Reynolds was vehemently opposed to
'wasting time' — to use his words — on any kind of formal analysis of the
user interface and its human factors properties. To him, user interfaces were a
peripheral issue."

"Anything new was a 'fad' to him [Reynolds]," Anderson added. "Computer
interfaces were a fad, object-oriented design was a fad, formal specification
and verification techniques were a fad, and most of all, prototyping was a fad."

Exactly one week after the December 11th meeting, the Robbie group received a
memo from Sam Reynolds concerning the project plan for the Robbie CX30 project.

"It was the waterfall model, right out of a textbook," Anderson told this
reporter as she reviewed a copy of the project plan memo. "Requirements
analysis and specification, then architectural design and detailed design,
coding, testing, delivery and maintenance. In Reynolds' view of things, there
was no need to have any user interaction with the system until very, very late
in the process."

The Sentinel-Observer has learned that the very first operator to actually use
the Robbie CX30 robot in an industrial setting was Bart Matthews, the man who
was killed in the killer robot tragedy. This initial use of Robbie CX30 in an
industrial setting was covered by the media, including this newspaper. In a
great irony, the Silicon Techtronics Annual Report for Shareholders, published
last March, has a picture of a smiling Bart Matthews on its glossy front cover.
Matthews is shown operating the very same Robbie CX30 robot which crushed him
to death barely two months after the photograph was taken.



