---
layout: newspaper
title: Silicon Techtronics Promised to Deliver a Safe Robot
---


# Silicon Techtronics Promised to Deliver a Safe Robot

## Quality of Operator Training Questioned

### Special to the SILICON VALLEY SENTINEL-OBSERVER, Silicon Valley, USA

<div class="byline mabel">
  <img alt="Mabel headshot" src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-muckraker.jpg" />
  by Mabel Muckraker
</div>

At a news conference this afternoon, a ragtag group of programmers who call
themselves the "Justice for Randy Samuels Committee" distributed documents
which show that Silicon Techtronics had obligated itself to deliver robots
which would "cause no bodily injury to the human operator." Randy Samuels is
the programmer who has been charged with manslaughter in the infamous "killer
robot" case.

"We cannot understand how the prosecuting attorney could charge Randy with
manslaughter when, in fact, Silicon Techtronics was legally bound to deliver a
safe robot to Cybernetics," said committee spokesperson, Ruth Witherspoon.

"We believe that there is a cover-up going on and that there is some kind of
collusion between SiliTech [Silicon Techtronics] management and the prosecuting
attorney's office. Michael Waterson was a major contributor to Ms. McMurdock's
re-election campaign last year."

<figure class="pair">
    <img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-waterson.jpg"
         alt="Michael Waterson" class="headshot"><img
         src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-mcmurdock.jpg"
         alt-="Jane McMurdock" class="headshot">
    <figcaption>
      Michael Waterson (left), President and CEO of Silicon Techtronics.
      Jane McMurdock, Prosecuting Attorney for the city of Silicon Valley.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

Michael Waterson is President and CEO of Silicon Techtronics. Jane McMurdock is
the Prosecuting Attorney for the city of Silicon Valley. The Sentinel-Observer
has confirmed that Waterson made several large contributions to the McMurdock
re-election campaign last fall.

"Randy is being made the scapegoat for a company which had lax quality control
standards and we are not going to stand for it!" Witherspoon shouted in an
emotional statement to reporters. "We believe that politics has entered this
case."

The documents which were distributed by the Justice for Randy Samuels committee
were portions of what is called a "requirements document." According to Ruth
Witherspoon and other committee members, this document proves that Samuels was
not legally responsible for the death of Bart Matthews, the unfortunate robot
operator who was killed by a Silicon Techtronics robot at Cybernetics, Inc. in
Silicon Heights last April.

The requirements document amounts to a contract between Silicon Techtronics and
Cybernetics, Inc. The requirements document spells out in complete detail the
functionality of the Robbie CX30 robot which Silicon Techtronics promised to
deliver to Cybernetics.

According to Witherspoon, the Robbie CX30 robot was designed to be an
"intelligent" robot which would be capable of operating in a variety of
industrial settings. Separate requirements documents were required for each
corporate customer since Robbie CX30 was not an "off-the-shelf" robot, but a
robot that needed to be programmed differently for each application.

However, all requirements documents which were agreed upon under the auspices
of the Robbie CX30 project, including the agreement between Silicon Techtronics
and Cybernetics, contain the following important statements:

"The robot will be safe to operate and even under exceptional conditions (see
Section 5.2) the robot will cause no bodily injury to the human operator."

"In the event of the exceptional conditions which potentially contain the risk
of bodily injury (see Section 5.2.4 and all of its subsections), the human
operator will be able to enter a sequence of command codes, as described in the
relevant sections of the functional specification (see Section 3.5.2), which
will arrest robot motion long before bodily injury can actually occur."

"Exceptional conditions" include unusual events such as bizarre data from the
robot sensors, erratic or violent robot motion or operator error. It was
exactly just such an exceptional condition which led to the death of Bart
Matthews.

These paragraphs were extracted from the portion of the requirements document
which dealt with "non-functional requirements." The non-functional requirements
list in complete detail the constraints under which the robot would be
operating. For example, the requirement that the robot be incapable of harming
its human operator is a constraint and Silicon Techtronics, according to Ruth
Witherspoon, was legally obligated to satisfy this constraint.

The functional requirements portion of the requirements document covers (again
in complete detail) the behavior of the robot and its interaction with its
environment and its human operator. In particular, the functional requirements
specified the behavior of the robot under each and every anticipated
exceptional condition.

<figure>
    <img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-witherspoon.jpg"
         alt="Ruth Witherspoon" class="headshot"><img
         src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-cx30.jpg"
         alt="CX30 robot" class="headshot">
    <figcaption>
      Ruth Witherspoon (left), Justice for Randy Samuels
      Committee spokesperson. The CX30 (nicknamed "Robbie") robot
      that malfunctioned. 
    </figcaption>
</figure>

In her statement to reporters at the news conference, Witherspoon explained
that Bart Matthews was killed when exceptional condition 5.2.4.26 arose. This
involved an exceptionally violent and unpredictable robot arm motion. This
condition required operator intervention, namely the entering of the command
codes mentioned in the document, but apparently, Bart Matthews became confused
and could not enter the codes successfully.

"Although Randy Samuels' program was in error — he did misinterpret the robot
dynamics formulas, as reported in the media — exceptional condition 5.2.4.26
was designed to protect against just this sort of contingency," Witherspoon
told reporters. "The robot motion values generated by Randy's program correctly
set off this exceptional condition and the robot operator received due warning
that something was wrong."

Witherspoon claimed that she has a signed affidavit from another Cybernetics
robot operator to the effect that the training sessions offered by Silicon
Techtronics never mentioned this and many other exceptional conditions.
According to Witherspoon, the robot operator has sworn that neither she nor any
other robot operator was ever told that the robot arm could oscillate
violently. Witherspoon quoted the affidavit at the news conference. "Neither I
not Bart Matthews was ever trained to handle this sort of exceptional
condition. I doubt that the Bart Matthews had any idea what he was supposed to
do when the computer screen started flashing the error message on the screen."

Exceptional conditions requiring operator intervention cause an error message
to be generated at the operator console. Silicon Valley Police confirm that
when Bart Matthews was killed, the reference manual at his console was opened
to the page of the index which contained entries for "errors."

Witherspoon then quoted sections of the requirements document which obligated
Silicon Techtronics (the vendor) to adequately train robot operators:

"The vendor shall provide forty (40) hours of operator training. This training
shall cover all aspects of robot operation including exhaustive coverage of the
safety procedures which must be followed in the case of exceptional conditions
which potentially contain the risk of bodily injury.

"The vendor shall provide and administer appropriate test instruments which
shall be used to certify sufficient operator understanding of robot console
operations and safety procedures. Only employees of customer who have passed
this test shall be allowed to operate the Robbie CX30 robot in an actual
industrial setting.

"The reference manual shall provide clear instructions for operator
intervention in all exceptional situations, especially and including those
which potentially contain the risk of bodily injury."

According to Witherspoon, sworn affidavits from several robot operators at
Cybernetics, Inc., state that only one work day (approximately eight hours) was
spent in operator training. Furthermore, almost no time was spent discussing
potentially dangerous exceptional conditions.

"The written test developed by Silicon Techtronics to certify a robot operator
was considered a 'joke' by Cybernetics employees," Witherspoon asserted.
"Silicon Techtronics obviously did not give much thought to the training and
testing procedures mandated by the requirements document according to the
evidence in our possession." 


