---
layout: newspaper
title: Developers of 'Killer Robot' Worked Under Enormous Stress
---

# Developers of 'Killer Robot' Worked Under Enormous Stress

## Special to the SILICON VALLEY SENTINEL-OBSERVER, Silicon Valley, USA

<div class="byline">
  <img alt="Mabel headshot" src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-muckraker.jpg" />
  by Mabel Muckraker
</div>

The Sentinel-Observer learned today that Randy Samuels and others who worked on
the 'killer robot' project at Silicon Techtronics were under tremendous
pressure to finish the robot software by January 1 of this year. According to
an informed source, top level management warned killer robot project staffers
that "heads would roll" if the January 1st deadline was not met. Randy Samuels,
a Silicon Techtronics programmer, was indicted last week on charges of
manslaughter in the now famous 'killer robot case'. Samuels wrote the flawed
software which caused a Silicon Techtronics Robbie CX30 industrial robot to
crush and fatally injure its operator, Bart Matthews. Matthews was a robot
operator at Cybernetics, Inc. According to Silicon Valley Prosecuting Attorney
Jane McMurdock, Samuels misinterpreted a mathematical formula, "turning
harmless Robbie into a savage killer."

<figure>
    <img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/silicon-techtronics-hq.jpg"
         alt="Silicon Techtronics HQ">
    <figcaption>
      Silicon Techtronics HQ, Robotics Division
    </figcaption>
</figure>

Our informed source, who wishes to remain anonymous and whom we shall call
'Martha' for the rest of this article, has intimate knowledge of all aspects of
the Robbie CX30 project. Martha told the Sentinel-Observer that there was an
enormous amount of friction between Robotics Division Chief Ray Johnson and the
Robbie CX30 Project Manager, Sam Reynolds. "They hated each others' guts,"
Martha told the Sentinel-Observer in an exclusive interview.

"By June of last year the robot project had fallen six months behind schedule
and Johnson went through the roof. There were rumors that the entire Robotics
Division, which he headed, would be terminated if Robbie [the CX30 robot]
didn't prove a commercial success. He [Johnson] called Sam [Reynolds] into his
office and he really chewed Sam out. I mean you could hear the yelling all the
way down the hall. Johnson told Sam to finish Robbie by the first of January or
'heads would roll'."

"I'm not saying that Johnson was ordering Sam to cut corners," Martha added. "I
think the idea of cutting corners was implicit. The message was, 'cut corners
if you want to keep your job'." According to documents which Martha provided
the Sentinel- Observer, twenty new programmers were added to the Robbie CX30
project on June 12th of last year. This was just several days after the stormy
meeting between Johnson and Reynolds which Martha recounted.

According to Martha, the new hirees were a disaster. "Johnson unilaterally
arranged for these new hires, presumably by shifting resources from other
aspects of the Robbie [CX30] project. Reynolds was vehemently opposed to this.
Johnson only knew about manufacturing hardware. That was his background. He
couldn't understand the difficulties that we were having with the robotics
software. You can't speed up a software project by adding more people. It's not
like an assembly line."

<figure>
    <img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-johnson.jpg"
         alt="Bart Matthews" class="headshot"><img src="{{site.baseurl}}/img/headshot-reynolds.jpg"
         alt-="Sam Reynolds"  class="headshot">
    <figcaption>
      Chief of Robotics Division Ray Johnson
      and CX30 Project Manager Sam Reynolds
    </figcaption>
</figure>

According to Martha and other sources inside the project, the hiring of twenty
new programmers led to a staff meeting attended by Johnson, Reynolds and all
members of the Robbie CX30 software project. "This time it was Sam [Reynolds]
who went through the roof. He complained that the project didn't need more
people. He argued that the main problem was that Johnson and other management
people did not understand that Robbie CX30 was fundamentally different from
earlier versions of the robot."

These sources tell the Sentinel-Observer that the new hirees were not fully
integrated into the project, even six months later, when ten Robbie CX30
robots, including the robot which killed Bart Matthews, were shipped out.
According to Martha, "Sam just wanted to keep things as simple as possible. He
didn't want the new people to complicate matters. They spent six months reading
manuals. Most of the new hirees didn't know diddly about robots and Sam wasn't
about to waste his time trying to teach them."

According to Martha, the June 12th meeting has become famous in Silicon
Techtronics corporate lore because it was at that meeting that Ray Johnson
announced his "Ivory Snow Theory" of software design and development. According
to Martha, "Ray [Johnson] gave us a big multi-media presentation, with slides
and everything. The gist of his 'Ivory Snow Theory' is simply that Ivory Snow
is 99 and 44/100 per cent pure and there was no reason why robotics software
had to be any purer than that. He stated repeatedly that 'Perfect software is
an oxymoron.'"

Martha, and the other insiders who came forward with information, consistently
portrayed Johnson as a manager in desperate need of a successful project.
Earlier versions of Robbie, the CX10 and the CX20, were experimental in nature
and no one expected them to be commercial successes. In fact, the Robotics
Division of Silicon Techtronics was operating heavily in the red since its
inception six years ago. Either CX30 would succeed or Silicon Techtronics would
be out of the industrial robotics business altogether.

"The earlier Robbie robots got a lot of press, especially here in Silicon
Valley," said another source, who also wishes to remain anonymous. "Robbie CX30
was going to capitalize on the good publicity generated by the earlier
projects. The only thing was that Robbie CX30 was more revolutionary than
Johnson wanted to admit. CX30 represented a gigantic step forward in terms of
sophistication. There were a lot of questions about the industrial settings
that the CX30 would be working in. Much of what we had to do was entirely new,
but Johnson couldn't bring himself to understand that. He just saw us as
unyielding perfectionists. One of his favorite quotes was 'Perfection is the
enemy of the good'."
